Remove a column from Active Record model (#174)
andycroll/andycroll.com: _posts/2022/2022-11-14-safely-remove-a-column-field-from-active-record.md

---
title: "Safely Remove a Column from an Active Record Model"
description: "Avoid migration-related errors when you’re tidying your database"
layout: article
category: ruby
image:
  base: "2022/safely-remove-a-column-field-from-active-record"
  alt: "A partial column against flat background"
  credit: "ANIRUDH"
  source: "https://unsplash.com/photos/jtiQCAAzLYY"
---

> Adding and deploying additional columns to an Active Record model is easy. Typically the deployment runs your migrations and then the new code that uses that database column is released afterward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding and deploying new columns to an existing Active Record model is often straightforward. Typically the first deployment runs your migrations and then new code that uses the new database column is released afterward.
```

> Adding and deploying new columns to an existing Active Record model is often straightforward. Typically the first deployment runs your migrations and then new code that uses the new database column is released afterward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding and deploying new columns to an existing Active Record model is often straightforward. Typically the first deployment runs your migrations, and then new code that uses the recently-added database column is released afterward.
```

> However, when removing a column you can more easily generate problems. Active Record caches database columns when it spins up a Rails application. When the column is removed from the database table it causes exceptions until your app reboots or redeploys.

Reviewer: Much better explanation!

*However, removing a column tends to generate problems/cause problems? If you use the latter you can change the later use of 'causes' to raise ?

Author: ```suggestion
However, removing a column tends to cause problems. Active Record caches database columns when it spins up a Rails application. When the column is removed from the database table it raises exceptions until your app reboots or redeploys.
```

> It's worth a multi-step strategy when removing columns in your database.

Reviewer: *also worth? (Because adding new columns is multi-step too, unless implicit in 'multi' is 'more than two'?)

Reviewer: The other thing is, surely most people are at least doing a two step strategy: getting rid of the code that uses the old column, and then dropping the old column?

Author: ```suggestion
It's also worth a multi-step strategy when removing columns in your database.
```

> However, when removing a column you can often have errors as the old code (that still references the column) will be running as your migration removes the column from the database. This is because Active Record caches database columns when it spins up a Rails application, without the column actually on the database table it causes exceptions until your app reboots or redeploys.

Reviewer: This paragraph needs a lil' tidying up with respect to clarity and punctuation!

Author: ```suggestion
However, when removing a column you can more easily generate problems. Active Record caches database columns when it spins up a Rails application. When the column is removed from the database table it causes exceptions until your app reboots or redeploys.
```

## Use...

> ...this multi-step strategy.

Reviewer: *:

Author: ```suggestion
...this multi-step strategy:
```

> To avoid this, it's worth a multi-step strategy when removing columns in your database.

Reviewer: *it's worth trying this multi-step strategy when... ?

Author: ```suggestion
It's worth a multi-step strategy when removing columns in your database.
```

> ...a multi-step strategy.

Reviewer: *this multi-step strategy:

Author: ```suggestion
...this multi-step strategy.
```

> First tell Active Record to ignore the column. This stops the rest of your application being able to reference this column.

Reviewer: Isn't the first step really removing all code that references the old column?

Author: No, you can find the places you use it by using the test suite!

Reviewer: Oh, yeah, I see what you mean!

> First tell Active Record to ignore the column.

Reviewer: We're assuming the code is no longer using the old column anywhere, right?

Author: ```suggestion
First tell Active Record to ignore the column. This stops the rest of your application being able to reference this column.
```

```ruby
class Thing < ApplicationRecord
  # ...
  self.ignored_columns = ["old_column"]
  # ...
end
```

> This is also a good way to use your test suite to find places you might be still using the column in your application. Once your tests are passing, deploy this code.

Author: ```suggestion
You can use your test suite to find places you might be still using the column in your application. Once your tests are passing, deploy this code.
```

> You can use your test suite to find places you might be still using the column in your application. Once your tests are passing, deploy this code.

Reviewer: Yup, clearer now that this is what you were espousing!

Reviewer: Maybe instead "Use your test suite..."

Author: ```suggestion
You can use your test suite to find places you might be still using the column, if you haven't already removed usage of it, in your application. Once your tests are passing, deploy this code.
```

> Then, create the migration to remove the actual database column.

Reviewer: *:

Author: ```suggestion
Then, create the migration to remove the actual database column:
```

> In a seperate change you can create the migration to remove the actual database column.

Reviewer: *separate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, create the migration to remove the actual database column.
```

```ruby
class RemoveOldColumnFromThings < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.0]
  def change
    remove_column :things, :old_column
  end
end
```

> Then deploy, migrating the column into oblivion.

Reviewer: 😆

> Then in a final change, remove the `ignored_columns` line you added for the initial step and deploy once more.

Reviewer: Lots of "Then..." used for each step...Maybe some can be "After that" or "Next"..?

Author: ```suggestion
After that, in a final change, remove the `ignored_columns` line you added for the initial step and deploy once more.
```

> Then in a final change you can remove the `ignored_columns` line you added in the initial step and deploy once more.

Reviewer: Can/should ?

Reviewer: *In/For the final step, remove the...

Author: ```suggestion
Then in a final change, remove the `ignored_columns` line you added for the initial step and deploy once more.
```

## Why?

> In a larger team or application, having stable and predictable ways to change your database, without causing errors or downtime is very important.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a larger team or application, having stable and predictable ways to change your database, without causing errors or downtime, is very important.
```

> Rails gives you the tools to change your database but doing it in the production environment of a busy application often requires greater care.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rails gives you built-in tools to change your database, but doing it in the production environment of a busy application often requires greater care.
```

> To a certain extent having good test coverage and a healthy process for deploying multiple times a day is a prerequisite of this method given that this “simple” column removal requires three seperate deployments.

Reviewer: *separate

Author: ```suggestion
To a certain extent having good test coverage and a healthy process for deploying multiple times a day is a prerequisite of this method given that this “simple” column removal requires three separate deployments.
```

> To a certain extent having good test coverage and a healthy process for deploying multiple times a day is a requirement of this method given that this “simple” column removal requires three seperate deployments.

Reviewer: *prerequisite?

Author: ```suggestion
To a certain extent having good test coverage and a healthy process for deploying multiple times a day is a prerequisite of this method given that this “simple” column removal requires three seperate deployments.
```

### There's a gem for that!

> Look into the [`strong_migrations` gem](https://github.com/ankane/strong_migrations) that was developed initially at InstaCart.

Reviewer: *initially developed?

Author: ```suggestion
Look into the [`strong_migrations` gem](https://github.com/ankane/strong_migrations) that was initially developed at InstaCart.
```

> It blocks potentially dangerous migrations and warns you, with lovely helpful instructions, if you code might block reads or writes for more than a few seconds or, like in this case, has a good chance of causing application errors.

Reviewer: *your

Reviewer: *...has a good chance of causing _other_ application errors ?

Author: ```suggestion
It blocks potentially dangerous migrations and warns you, with lovely helpful instructions, if your code might block reads or writes for more than a few seconds or, like in this case, has a good chance of causing other application errors.
```

> It blocks potentially dangerous migrations and warns you, with lovely helpful instructions, if you code might block reads or writes for more than a few seconds or (like in this case) has a good chance of causing application errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It blocks potentially dangerous migrations and warns you, with lovely helpful instructions, if you code might block reads or writes for more than a few seconds or, like in this case, has a good chance of causing application errors.
```

> It blocks and warns you, with lovely helpful instructions, if your migration has the possibility of blocking reads or writes for more than a few seconds or (like in this case) has a good chance of causing application errors.

Reviewer: *It blocks potentially dangerous migrations and warns you, with... ?

Author: ```suggestion
It blocks potentially dangerous migrations and warns you, with lovely helpful instructions, if you code might block reads or writes for more than a few seconds or (like in this case) has a good chance of causing application errors.
```

## Why not?

> In small trafficked projects, or the early stages of a Rails application this isn't strictly necessary. You might in this case put up with a handful of errors on deploy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In projects with low traffic, or during the early stages of a Rails application, this isn't strictly necessary. In cases like this, you're likely fine putting up with a handful of errors on deploy.
```

> This is, however, a good habit to begin to exercise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Still, this is a good habit to begin to exercise as early as possible!
```
